## Version 2.7.0 (Dec 23, 2020)

### Changes from version 2.6 which are relevant for users:

__Changes leading to differences with previous versions__

  - The definition of the omega angle has been modified to adhere to the IUPAC standard (i.e. with the previous amino acid)

__New contributed modules:__

  - A new Funnel module by Stefano Raniolo and Vittorio Limongelli 
     - [FUNNEL_PS](FUNNEL_PS.md) 
     - [FUNNEL](FUNNEL.md) 
  - A new Infinite Switch Simulated Tempering in Force module by Glen Hocky
     - [FISST](FISST.md)
  - A new OPES module by Michele Invernizzi
     - [OPES_METAD](OPES_METAD.md)

__New actions:__

  - [ENVIRONMENTSIMILARITY](ENVIRONMENTSIMILARITY.md) from Pablo Piaggi
  - [PROJECTION_ON_AXIS](PROJECTION_ON_AXIS.md) from
  - [FUNCPATHGENERAL](FUNCPATHGENERAL.md) from

__Other improvements:__

  - [MOLINFO](MOLINFO.md) action can now be used multiple times. Every action doing a search will use the latest
    appearance. See [here](https://github.com/plumed/plumed2/issues/134).
  - Neighbor lists are now OpenMP and MPI parallel so improving the scalability of all actions employing them
  - It is now possible to pass pdb files with all weights set to zero. Instead of reporting an error,
    PLUMED will now assume they are all equal to 1/n, where n is the number of atoms (see [here](https://github.com/plumed/plumed2/issues/608)).
  - All the examples in the manual are now displayed with contextual help and regularly tested for correctness.
  - A tool to build PLUMED input directly within a python script has been added (see [here](https://github.com/plumed/plumed2/issues/611)
    and documentation for class `plumed.InputBuilder()`).
  - Python function `plumed.read_as_pandas()` now also accepts an argument `index_col`.
  - Lepton arithmetics can be used also when reading integers (e.g., `METAD PACE=2*5`, see [here](https://github.com/plumed/plumed2/issues/614)).

__GROMACS:__

  - When using `-hrex` flag, the neighbor lists are update automatically at every exchange step.
    This relaxes the requirements on the choice of `-replex` stride (see [here](https://github.com/plumed/plumed2/issues/579), thanks to Chang Junhan).

__Changes in the DRR module__

  - Support multi-time stepping. Now the STRIDE keyword should work with DRR correctly.
  - Support reflecting boundary conditions, which should be a better solution to the boundary effect of eABF in non-periodic cases. You can use REFLECTINGWALL to enable it.
  - Stop the simulation when the temperature is not passed from the MD engine to PLUMED. In this case, users should set the temperature by the TEMP keyword.

__Changes in the ISDB module__

  - There is a new option for OPTSIGMAMEAN, SEM_MAX that allows to automatically determine an optimal value for SIGMA_MAX

__Changes in the VES module__

  - Small changes to TD_MULTICANONICAL and TD_MULTITHERMAL_MULTIBARIC. Bug fix concerning the calculation of the logarithm of the target distribution. Added the keyword EPSILON to avoid dealing with regions of zero target probability.

### For developers:

- small fix in `Plumed.h` too avoid unique global symbols (see [here](https://github.com/plumed/plumed2/issues/549))
- Added `cmd("readInputLines")` to allow reading input from a buffer with comments and continuation lines (see [here](https://github.com/plumed/plumed2/issues/571)).
- fixed error when the install prefix contained unicode characters

## Version 2.7.1 (Apr 16, 2021)

- Includes all fixes up to 2.6.3
- In python interface, fixed usage of python arrays to allow compatibility with PyPy.
- New/updated patches:
  - updated patch for gromacs-2020.5
  - new patch for gromacs-2021
    - this should work with multiple-time stepping (plumed forces are integrated with the smallest time step, plumed can internally implement a multiple-time step if needed). 
    - Modular simulator is still not supported
    - hrex, lambda cv and replica-exchange are not yet tested
 
## Version 2.7.2 (Jul 27, 2021)

- Includes all fixes up to 2.6.4
- Fixed a bug in the `-hrex` implementation for GROMACS 2020 and 2021 (see #691, thanks to Chang Junhan).
- Changes in the OPES module
  - the CALC_WORK option now outputs the accumulated work, as in METAD, instead of the work done in the last bias update

## Version 2.7.3 (Dec 1, 2021)

- Includes all fixes up to 2.6.5
- GROMACS patches now take a note of the used PLUMED version in the GROMACS log (see [here](https://github.com/plumed/plumed2/issues/737))
- GROMACS 2021 patch renamed to 2021.4 for consistency.

## Version 2.7.4 (Feb 22, 2022)

- Includes all fixes up to 2.6.6

## Version 2.7.5 (Oct 21, 2022)

- Minor fixes in error reporting.
- Fix in building python package with MacPorts and MacOS 11.
- Fixed overflows when using `plumed sum_hills --idw`, see [here](https://github.com/plumed/plumed2/issues/823).
- Renamed version file to `VERSION.txt` to avoid issues with some MacOS compilers.
- Fixed periodicity bug in [pesmd](pesmd.md).
- Fixed an issue with timestep roundoff apparent in Windows build.
- Fixed an issue with [METAINFERENCE](METAINFERENCE.md) noisetype OUTLIERS/MOUTLIERS when not using replicas, thanks @hmcezar #847
- Fixed [this problem](https://github.com/plumed/plumed2/issues/833).
- Fixed [this problem](https://github.com/plumed/plumed2/issues/841).
- Fixed an incorrect `const` conversion in `wrapper/Plumed.h`.

## Version 2.7.6 (Mar 13, 2023)

!!! warning "Not maintained"

    This branch is not maintained Users are invited to upgrade to a newer version.

- Fixed a bug in [pathtools](pathtools.md) where the distance was not squared and the suggested lambda was incorrect, thanks @rebelot #894
- Fixed a bug in [SAXS](SAXS.md) cv using recent versions of arrayfire
- Fixed checks on the number of used CVs in [TD_MULTICANONICAL](TD_MULTICANONICAL.md) and [TD_MULTITHERMAL_MULTIBARIC](TD_MULTITHERMAL_MULTIBARIC.md)
- Fixed [PIV](PIV.md) with `VOLUME`, see [here](https://github.com/plumed/plumed2/issues/883).
- Fixed generation of documentation with MPI examples.
- plumed patch properly detects code patched with `--include` option (available as of plumed 2.9, might become the default)
